---
layout: post
title: "Chapter 2: Arrays"
date: 2016-02-10
---

## Arrays

Arrays are lists that contain elements of any data type (numbers, strings, boolean). They will become useful to contain elements you want to store in one data structure (arrays are one of many data structures). 

### 1. Accessing Array Elements

Remember, in CS, indices start with 0. So the first element would have index of 0.

<pre><code>
		      0		1	  2
	var fruits = ["apple", "banana", "pear"];
</code></pre>

To access \"apple\" of the array, we can specify it using its index. The syntax is in the following format:

<pre><code>
	fruits[0]		// apple
	fruits[1]		// banana
	fruits[2]		// pear
</code></pre>

We use brackets to indicate the index of the element we want with the name of the array preceding the brackets.

We can assign our elements to variables now:

<pre><code>
	var apple;
	apple = fruits[0];
	var banana = fruits[1];
</code></pre>

To know the length of an array, we can use the length function:

<pre><code>
	var len = fruits.length;	// 3
</code></pre>

Let\'s say we have a huge array with more than a hundred elements. So what if we want to access the last element, but we don\'t want to count all the indices? We can use the length function to grab the last element. Just remember to subtract 1 (remember the first index starts with 0):

<pre><code>
	var last_element = fruits[fruits.length-1];
</code></pre>

Or using the \"len\" variable we declared above:

<pre><code>
	var last_element = fruits[len-1];
</code></pre>

### 2. Adding Array Elements

We can add more elements into our array. There is a specific syntax for that using \"push\":

<pre><code>
	fruits.push("lemon");
	// fruits is now ["apple", "banana", "pear", "lemon"]
</code></pre>

Don\'t forget the semicolons! Remember, the Javascript interpreter won
\'t recognize strings without them.

The \"push\" function only pushes a new element to the end of the array. What if we want to add the element to a specific location in the array? Let's try inserting an element into a place specified with an index:

<pre><code>
	fruits[0].push("lemon");
</code></pre>

Unfortunately, this does not work. Maybe we can try assigning \"lemon\" into the location instead:

<pre><code>
	fruits[0] = "lemon";
</code></pre>

There is actually a function that you can use: *arr.splice(index, 0, item)*. Its implementation is noted below in case you are curious.

<pre><code>
	arr.splice(0, 0, "lemon");	// ["lemon","apple","banana"]
	arr.splice(1, 0, "lemon");	// ["apple","lemon","banana"]
	arr.splice(2, 0, "lemon");	// ["apple","banana","lemon"]
</code></pre>

### 3. Deleting Elements

You can pop off the last element with the pop function:

<pre><code>
	var fruits = ["apple","banana","lemon"];
	fruits.pop();				// ["apple", "banana"]
</code></pre>

You can also specify which element you wish to delete:

<pre><code>
	var fruits = ["apple","banana","lemon"];
	delete fruits[0];			// ["banana","lemon"]
</code></pre>

### 4. Other Methods To Know

We can sort the elements in the array by alphabetical order:

<pre><code>
	var names = ["Julie", "Andrew", "Nick"];
	names.sort();				// ["Andrew", "Julie", "Nick"];
</code></pre>

Or numerically,
<pre><code>
	var numbers = [4, 2, 0, -5];
	numbers.sort();				// [-5, 0, 2, 4]
</code></pre>

We can reverse the order of any array.

<pre><code>
	var numbers = [4, 2, 0, -5];
	numbers.reverse();				// [-5, 0, 2, 4]
	var names = ["Julie", "Andrew", "Nick"];
	names.reverse();				// ["Nick", "Andrew", "Julie"]
</code></pre>

### 5. Summary

* Accessing elements via index inside brackets

* Grabbing length of array - *arr*.length

* Adding element into array - *arr*.push(*element*)

* Deleting element from array 
	
	- *arr*.pop()
	- delete *arr*[*index*]

* Sort array - *arr*.sort()

* Reverse array - *arr*.reverse()







