---
layout: post
title: "Chapter 4: Objects I"
date: 2016-02-18
---

## Objects I

### 1. Objects in Real Life and Computer Science

In English, an object refers to a specific thing that is seen or touched. It has several properties that we can describe the object with - for example, a student has a name, student ID, and a GPA. We can build this kind of object along with its properties in Javascript as well.

Let\'s consider the student object below:

<pre><code>
	Object: Student

	Properties: name, student ID, GPA

	Methods: say name, study
</code></pre>

You can think of **properties** as adjectives describing the object and **methods** as verbs that the object can carry out. 

In JS, we can declare this object with its properties in the following:

<pre><code>
	var student = {
		name: "Jess",
		studentID: 123456,
		GPA: 3.75
	}
</code></pre>

These are sort of like arrays, except we are using *curly* brackets and we have a property followed by a colon with its specified property inside the brackets. This type of data structure is called a **dictionary**.

<pre><code>
	student: a person who is studying at a school or college
</code></pre>

Similar to dictionaries consisting of words and their corresponding definitions, the JS dictionary contains a key that is paired with its corresponding value.

>>>>>> *key* : *value*

In this case, our keys are name, studentID, and GPA; our values are \"Jess\", 123456, and 3.75 respectively.

We can also declare methods inside the object declaration. **Methods** are another name for **functions** that we went over last time. Remember how we declared functions?

<pre><code>
	function add(x, y)
	{
		return x+y;
	}
</code></pre>

We can do the same thing - we just need to pair our function as a value to a key. For our student object, it can look like this:

<pre><code>
	var student = {
		name: "Jess",
		studentID: 123456,
		GPA: 3.75,
		sayName: function () {
			return "Hi, my name is " + this.name;
		}
	}
</code></pre>

This syntax of declaring an object is called **Object Literal**.

It\'s important to specify the \"this\" since it is a JS keyword that specifies that the code is referring to the object the code is inside. The keyword **this** is NOT a variable; thus, you cannot change its value.

When it is used inside an object like above, you are referring to the object itself.

When it is used inside a function, you are referring to the object that *calls* the function. We will see an example of this soon.


### 2. So what can we do with Objects?

Referring to the above student object, we can access its properties and methods, just like accessing specific elements in an array.


#### Accessing Properties

One way to grab the *name* property of the student object is by using a period after the object (student) variable and specifying the *name* property - WITHOUT parentheses:

<pre><code>
	var firstname = student.name;		// "Jess"
</code></pre>

We can do this with all other properties:

<pre><code>
	var ID = student.studentID;
	var gpa = student["GPA"];			// This works too.
</code></pre>

As you can see, the second line is another syntax you can use to access a property. Just don\'t forget the double quotation marks inside the brackets!

#### Accessing Methods

To access the object\'s *methods*, we do the same thing WITH parentheses this time:

<pre><code>
	var intro = student.sayName();
	alert(intro);
</code></pre>

This is calling the sayName() function inside the student object declaration.

#### Adding New Properties into Objects

Assuming the object is already declared, you can add new properties to it:

<pre><code>
	student.gender = "Female";
</code></pre>

Now the student object has 4 properties.

#### Deleting Properties from Objects

<pre><code>
	delete student.gender;
</code></pre>

The student object is back to its original format (3 properties).

#### Adding Methods into Objects

Let\'s say every time a student studies, her/his GPA will rise by 0.01. How can you implement this function below?

<pre><code>
	var student = {
		name: "Jess",
		studentID: 123456,
		GPA: 3.75,
		sayName: function () {
			return "Hi, my name is " + this.name;
		},
		study: function () {
			// ... 
		}
	}
</code></pre>

It could look like this:

<pre><code>
	var student = {
		name: "Jess",
		studentID: 123456,
		GPA: 3.75,
		sayName: function () {
			return "Hi, my name is " + this.name;
		},
		study: function () {
			GPA += 0.01;
			return GPA;
		}
	}
</code></pre>

You can also create functions that take in parameters as well and change its existing properties. We will go over more ways of accessing and creating new objects later, but now you should be able to do the following exercise!

Remember the calculator exercise from last lesson? We can build the calculator using what we know about objects now. Why don\'t we create a new object for our calculator first.

<pre><code>
	var calculator = {
		// ... 
	}
</code></pre>

















