---
layout: post
title: "Project I: Real-Time Clock"
date: 2016-02-28
---

## Project I - Clock

### 1. Creating the function

I will step with you through the steps of creating the function for the clock.

First create a function called clock.

Inside that function, create a new variable called currentTime. We are actually creating a new **instance** of an object called Date() (we will go over instances and objects in the next lesson).

Your declaration and initialization should look like this:

<pre><code>
	var currentTime = new Date();
</code></pre>

Every time you create a new instance of an object, you use the **new** keyword. This is all inside the function we created first.

Now create a *hours* variable that is assigned the currentTime's hours function:

<pre><code>
	var hours = currentTime.getHours();
</code></pre>

Create two more variables that get *minutes* and *seconds* using the functions:

> getMinutes()

> getSeconds()

So now we should have hours, minutes, and seconds variables. We want to display these variables in a clock-like display, using colons. Can we console log the entire time in the clock display? (hint: concatenate hours, minutes, and seconds using the add operator.)

It should look like this when you console log the time:

<pre><code>
	"15:19:7"		// orsome current time that you're doing this
</code></pre>


### 2. Adding the Meridiem

What if we want to add the meridiem: AM or PM?

This means the hours should show up to maximum 12, and anything greater than 12 should show PM. How can we make this happen?

We can use the If-Statement to check whether the hours variable is greater than 12. If it is, we want to subtract the hours variable by 12 to show the PM hour and a meridiem variable to indicate that it is PM. Everything else, hours will stay the same and the meridiem can stay \"AM\".

Inside the function, create your meridiem variable first. (Remember: make sure to declare variables before using them. **Where** you declare variables is very important.)

<pre><code>
	var meridiem = "AM";		// something like this works.
</code></pre>

Now, create your if-statement that checks whether hours is greater than 12.

Then, inside your if-statement, write your code that modify the hours accordingly for PM hours and assign your *meridiem* variable with \"PM\".

Now, try console logging the entire time along with the meridiem variable at the end.

It should show something like this:

<pre><code>
	"3:19:7 PM"		// or some current time that you're doing this
</code></pre>










